README.md, before:

# Starfish

[![MIT license](http://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-brightgreen.svg)](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Starfish is a tool for comparing and intersecting multiple VCF files with haplotype awareness by using the powerful [RTGTools](https://github.com/RealTimeGenomics/rtg-tools) `vcfeval` engine. The name "Starfish" comes from the shape of the Venn diagram the program can draw (with 5 VCFs!).

![Starfish Venn](venn.png)

## Requirements

- Python3
- [pysam](https://github.com/pysam-developers/pysam)
- [bcftools](https://github.com/samtools/bcftools)
- [RTG Tools](https://github.com/RealTimeGenomics/rtg-tools)
- [pyvenn](https://github.com/tctianchi/pyvenn) [optional: for drawing Venn diagrams]

## Installation

```shell
git clone --recursive https://github.com/dancooke/starfish
```

## Usage

There are just three required options:

- `--sdf`: The RTG Tools SDF reference directory (use `rtg format`)
- `--variants` (short `-V`): A list of VCF files to intersect.
- `--output` (short `-O`): A directory path to write intersections.

For example: 

```shell
./starfish \
    --sdf reference_sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec
```

Will result in the directory `isec` containing the following files:

- `A.vcf.gz`: Records unique to `vcf1.vcf.gz`.
- `B.vcf.gz`: Records unique to `vcf2.vcf.gz`.
- `C.vcf.gz`: Records unique to `vcf3.vcf.gz`.
- `AB.vcf.gz`: Records in `vcf1.vcf.gz` and `vcf2.vcf.gz` but not `vcf3.vcf.gz`.
- `AC.vcf.gz`: Records in `vcf1.vcf.gz` and `vcf3.vcf.gz` but not `vcf2.vcf.gz`.
- `BC.vcf.gz`: Records in `vcf2.vcf.gz` and `vcf3.vcf.gz` but not `vcf1.vcf.gz`.
- `ABC.vcf.gz`: Records common to `vcf1.vcf.gz`, `vcf2.vcf.gz`, and `vcf3.vcf.gz`.

In other words, the VCF files are labelled (in order) using upper-case letters, and the filenames in the output directory contain records unique to the labels in the filename.

### Restricting comparison to certain regions

By default, all regions in the reference genome (which must be the same for all input VCFs) are used. To restrict comparison to a subset of regions, supply a BED file to the `--regions` option.

### Ignoring filtered records

By default, records that are filtered are not included in the comparison. To include them add the `--all_records` option the your command.

### Ignoring genotype mismatches

By default, records will not be matched if the genotypes do not match. To ignore genotype mismatched (and only compare called alleles), specify the sample to compare as `ALT`:

```shell
./starfish \
    --sdf reference_sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec \
    --sample ALT
```

## Drawing Venn diagrams

Starfish can draw Venn diagrams showing the number of intersected records for up to 6 VCFs (if the `pyvenn` package is installed). To do this you need to supply names for each of the VCFs with the `--names` command:

```shell
./starfish \
    --sdf reference_sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec \
    --names Octopus GATK4 FreeBayes
```

To save the Venn diagram to PDF use the `--vennout` option:

```shell
./starfish \
    --sdf reference_sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec \
    --names Octopus GATK4 FreeBayes \
    --vennout venn.pdf
```

## Limiations

Since RTG Tools vcfeval is used to compare VCF files, starfish inherits all limitations of this tool. Namely:

- Only one sample can be compared. You can use the `--sample` option if your VCFs have multiple samples, but the given sample must be present in all input VCFs.

Commit message:

Add short option -t for --sdf and rename --all_records and --ref_overlap

README.md, after:

# Starfish

[![MIT license](http://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-brightgreen.svg)](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Starfish is a tool for comparing and intersecting multiple VCF files with haplotype awareness by using the powerful [RTGTools](https://github.com/RealTimeGenomics/rtg-tools) `vcfeval` engine. The name "Starfish" comes from the shape of the Venn diagram the program can draw (with 5 VCFs!).

![Starfish Venn](venn.png)

## Requirements

- Python3
- [pysam](https://github.com/pysam-developers/pysam)
- [bcftools](https://github.com/samtools/bcftools)
- [RTG Tools](https://github.com/RealTimeGenomics/rtg-tools)
- [pyvenn](https://github.com/tctianchi/pyvenn) [optional: for drawing Venn diagrams]

## Installation

```shell
git clone --recursive https://github.com/dancooke/starfish
```

## Usage

There are just three required options:

- `--sdf` (short `-t`): The RTG Tools SDF reference directory (use `rtg format`)
- `--variants` (short `-V`): A list of VCF files to intersect.
- `--output` (short `-O`): A directory path to write intersections.

For example: 

```shell
./starfish \
    -t reference.sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec
```

Will result in the directory `isec` containing the following files:

- `A.vcf.gz`: Records unique to `vcf1.vcf.gz`.
- `B.vcf.gz`: Records unique to `vcf2.vcf.gz`.
- `C.vcf.gz`: Records unique to `vcf3.vcf.gz`.
- `AB.vcf.gz`: Records in `vcf1.vcf.gz` and `vcf2.vcf.gz` but not `vcf3.vcf.gz`.
- `AC.vcf.gz`: Records in `vcf1.vcf.gz` and `vcf3.vcf.gz` but not `vcf2.vcf.gz`.
- `BC.vcf.gz`: Records in `vcf2.vcf.gz` and `vcf3.vcf.gz` but not `vcf1.vcf.gz`.
- `ABC.vcf.gz`: Records common to `vcf1.vcf.gz`, `vcf2.vcf.gz`, and `vcf3.vcf.gz`.

In other words, the VCF files are labelled (in order) using upper-case letters, and the filenames in the output directory contain records unique to the labels in the filename.

### Restricting comparison to certain regions

By default, all regions in the reference genome (which must be the same for all input VCFs) are used. To restrict comparison to a subset of regions, supply a BED file to the `--regions` option.

### Ignoring filtered records

By default, records that are filtered are not included in the comparison. To include them add the `--all-records` option the your command.

### Ignoring genotype mismatches

By default, records will not be matched if the genotypes do not match. To ignore genotype mismatched (and only compare called alleles), specify the sample to compare as `ALT`:

```shell
./starfish \
    -t reference.sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec \
    --sample ALT
```

## Drawing Venn diagrams

Starfish can draw Venn diagrams showing the number of intersected records for up to 6 VCFs (if the `pyvenn` package is installed). To do this you need to supply names for each of the VCFs with the `--names` command:

```shell
./starfish \
    -t reference.sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec \
    --names Octopus GATK4 FreeBayes
```

To save the Venn diagram to PDF use the `--vennout` option:

```shell
./starfish \
    -t reference.sdf \
    -V vcf1.vcf.gz vcf2.vcf.gz vcf3.vcf.gz \
    -O isec \
    --names Octopus GATK4 FreeBayes \
    --vennout venn.pdf
```

## Limiations

Starfish has a number of limitations:

- Only haploid and diploid genotype comparisons are supported (due to RTGTools vcfeval).
- Only one sample can be compared. You can use the `--sample` option if your VCFs have multiple samples, but the given sample must be present in all input VCFs.
- The number of unique intersections grows exponentially with the number of input VCFs.
